# Static asset pipeline

This page documents additional information that may be useful when
developing new features for Zulip that require front-end changes,
especially those that involve adding new files. For a more general
overview, see the [new feature tutorial](new-feature-tutorial.html).

## Primary build process

Most of the existing JS in Zulip is written in IIFE-wrapped modules,
one per file in the `static/js` directory.  When running Zulip in
development mode, each file is loaded separately, to make reloading
nice and efficient.  In production mode (and when creating a release
tarball using `tools/build-release-tarball`), JavaScript files are
concatenated and minified.  We use the
[django pipeline extension](https://django-pipeline.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
to manage our static assets.

## Adding static files

To add a static file to the app (JavaScript, CSS, images, etc), first
add it to the appropriate place under `static/`.

- Third-party files that we haven't patched should be installed via
  `npm`, so that it's easy to upgrade them and third-party code
  doesn't bloat the Zulip repository.  You can then access them in
  `JS_SPECS` via their paths under `node_modules` (technically,
  `static/node_modules`, but the static is automatically appended).
  You'll want to add these to the `package.json` in the root of the
  repository, and then provision (to have `npm` download them) before
  continuing.  Your commit should also update `PROVISION_VERSION` in
  `version.py`.
- Third-party files that we have patched should all go in
  `static/third/`. Tag the commit with "[third]" when adding or
  modifying a third-party package.  Our goal is to the extent possible
  to eliminate patched third-party code from the project.
- Our own JavaScript lives under `static/js`; CSS lives under
  `static/styles`.  Portico JavaScript ("portico" means for logged-out
  pages) lives under `static/js/portico`.

After you add a new JavaScript file, it needs to be specified in the
`JS_SPECS` dictionary defined in `zproject/settings.py` to be included
in the concatenated file; this will magically ensure it is available
both in development and production.  Similarly, CSS should be added to
the `STYLESHEETS` section of `PIPELINE` in `zproject/settings.py`.  A
few notes on doing this:

* If you plan to only use the JS/CSS within the app proper, and not on
  the login page or other standalone pages, put it in the `app`
  bundle.
* If you plan to use it in both, put it in the `common` bundle.
* If it's just used on a single standalone page (e.g. `/stats`), give
  it its own bundle.  To load a bundle in the relevant Jinja2 template
  for that page, use `minified_js` and `stylesheet` for JS and CSS,
  respectively.

If you want to test minified files in development, look for the
`PIPELINE_ENABLED =` line in `zproject/settings.py` and set it to `True`
-- or just set `DEBUG = False`.

Note that `static/html/{400,5xx}.html` will only render properly if
minification is enabled, since they, by nature, hardcode the path
`static/min/portico.css`.

## Experimental Webpack/CommonJS modules

This section is experimental and largely irrelevant unless you're
interested in helping migrate Zulip to a more modern static asset
pipeline.

New JS written for Zulip can be written as CommonJS modules (bundled
using [webpack](https://webpack.github.io/), though this will be taken care
of automatically whenever `run-dev.py` is running). (CommonJS is the
same module format that Node uses, so see the [Node
documentation](https://nodejs.org/docs/latest/api/modules.html) for
more information on the syntax.)

Benefits of using CommonJS modules over the
[IIFE](http://benalman.com/news/2010/11/immediately-invoked-function-expression/)
module approach:

-   namespacing/module boilerplate will be added automatically in the
    bundling process
-   dependencies between modules are more explicit and easier to trace
-   no separate list of JS files needs to be maintained for
    concatenation and minification
-   third-party libraries can be more easily installed/versioned using
    npm
-   running the same code in the browser and in Node for testing is
    simplified (as both environments use the same module syntax)

The entry point file for the bundle generated by webpack is
`static/js/src/main.js`. Any modules you add will need to be required
from this file (or one of its dependencies) in order to be included in
the script bundle.
